IN THE YEAR 2000 THE
BBC STARTED TO
RECORD THE LIVES
OF OF 25 CHILDREN.
THEIR FAMILIES COME FROM ALL
OVER THE UNITED KINGDOM
AND ALL WALKS OF LIFE.
HOW WILL THEIR PARENTS
INFLUENCE THEIR LIVES?
AND HOW WILL THEIR GENES AND
THEIR ENVIRONMENT COMBINE
TO FORM THEIR PERSONALITY?
THIS HUGE PROJECT WILL
LAST FOR TWENTY YEARS.
FOLLOWING THESE
CHILDREN AS THEY GROW,
TO FIND OUT WHAT
MAKES US WHO WE ARE.
NOBODY'S PERFECT.
OUCH.
NEITHER ARE CHILDREN,
NOR THEIR PARENTS.
MOM!
HOW SIX ARE STARTING TO FEEL
THE INFLUENCE OF A WIDER WORLD.
HOW DO WE WORK OUT
WHAT'S RIGHT OR WRONG,
GOOD OR BAD?
&nbsp WHAT'S THE VERY WORST THING
&nbsp ANYONE CAN DO?
STEALING PEOPLES'
BAGS AND PURSES.
PAINT WINDOWS.
ROB.
KILL PEOPLE WITH GUNS.
THE EXTREMES ARE ONE THING,
BUT WHAT ABOUT EVERYDAY LIFE?
WHERE DO WE GET
OUR VALUES FROM?
OUR PARENTS?
OR SOMEWHERE ELSE?
&nbsp YOU HURT HIS
&nbsp MOUTH, WHAT DO YOU SAY?
&nbsp SORRY.
WHO SETS THE RULES?
DADDY.
MOMMY.
MOMMY AND DADDY.
MY CLASS MAKES RULES.
THE HEADMASTER.
THEY WON'T YELL AT ME.
ME! ME! ME!
SO WHICH RULES ARE PERMANENT
AND WHAT DO WE ACTUALLY BEND?
WHAT VALUES DO WE WANT TO
PASS ON TO OUR CHILDREN
AND WHAT ARE THEY
ACTUALLY PICKING UP?
AND IS THERE ANYTHING THAT
WE ALL STILL ALL BELIEVE IN?
TO BE CONFIDENT ABOUT
JUDGING RIGHT AND WRONG,
YOU NEED TO HAVE LEARNED ONE OF
LIFE'S IMPORTANT LESSONS.
WHICH IS WORSE - BREAKING
ONE GLASS ON PURPOSE
OR SIX BY ACCIDENT?
WHAT YOU MEAN TO
DO CAN MATTER.
SOMETIMES MORE
THAN WHAT YOU ACTUALLY DO.
CAUSE HE DID IT ON PURPOSE.
ON PURPOSE.
HE MEANT TO BRAKE SOMETHING.
&nbspAND WHAT DO YOU THINK
&nbspHIS PUNISHMENT SHOULD BEE?
GROUNDED.
&nbspFOR HOW LONG??
FOR 600 WEEKS.
SOME ARE LATER TO
GRASP THIS THAN OTHERS.
BUT HE DROPPED MORE
GLASSES THAN THE OTHER ONE.
THIS NEW INSIGHT MEANS
OUR CHILDREN ARE WATCHING
THE ADULTS AROUND THEM
TO LEARN HOW THEY
SHOULD LIVE THEIR LIVES.
AND THEY'RE SEEING SOME
VERY DIFFERENT LESSONS.
ALONG THE THAMES ESTUARY ON
THE EDGE OF LONDON IS ERITH.
IT'S IN THE LOWEST 20 PERCENT
OF DEPRIVED WARDS IN ENGLAND.
AND IT'S WHERE ONE
OF OUR CHILDREN
HAS SPENT ALL HER LIFE.
I'M CHARLIE PLASTER!
CHARLIE IS THE OLDEST
IN THE PLASTER FAMILY.
THAT'S MOMMY, CAYLA AND DADDY.
SHE LIVES WITH HER
MOM TONI, DAD ROB,
SISTER CAYLA AND NEW
BABY BROTHER ALEX.
LIKE ANY OTHER, THE
FAMILY HAS ITS RULES.
DINNER IS TO BE AT THE TABLE.
ALWAYS SAY
PLEASE AND THANK YOU.
BEDTIME 7 O'CLOCK.
I'M NOT TELLING FIBS!
ALTHOUGH CHARLIE DOESN'T
ALWAYS CHOOSE TO OBEY THEM.
COME UPSTAIRS NOW!
NO!
ONE, TWO ,THREE!
CHILDREN AND PARENTS DON'T
ALWAYS AGREE ON WHAT'S RIGHT
AND WHAT'S WRONG.
I'VE ALWAYS BIN TAUGHT
IF SOMEONE HITS YOU,
YOU HIT THEM BACK.
AND MY MOM'S
ALWAYS GOING TO ME,
IF YOU DON'T HIT THEM BACK,
I'LL DRIVE YOU UP THERE OR
I'LL BEAT YOU MYSELF.
SO I'M LIKE ALRIGHT GREAT.
WHEN CHARLIE COMES HOME,
SHE'S ALL SO AND SO'S
BEEN HORRIBLE TO ME
AND I'M ALL WELL
JUST HIT HIM.
HIT HIM BACK. I SAY TO HER.
SHE'S LIKE NO BECAUSE I'LL GET
IN TROUBLE BY THE TEACHER
AND I'M LIKE WELL YOU TELL
THE TEACHER YOUR MOM SAID
HIT HIM BACK IF THEY
HURT ME.
AND SHE'S LIKE NO,
IT'S WRONG.
I'LL GET IN TROUBLE.
WHEN TONI WAS A CHILD,
SHE WAS ALWAYS IN TROUBLE.
WHEN SHE GOT
PREGNANT AT 16,
IT CAME AS NO
SURPRISE TO HER MOM.
SHE WAS A BIT OF A
BOISTEROUS CHILD,
BEING EXCLUDED FROM SCHOOL AND
WHENEVER THERE WAS A FIRE
OR ANYTHING SHE WAS
THERE IN THE FRONT,
EVEN THOUGH SHE HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH IT.
I JUST LOVED THE ACTION.
I SAID TO HER ONE DAY
YOU'RE GOING TO GROW UP
AND HAVE A CHILD
JUST LIKE YOURSELF.
MY MOM WAS TOLD THAT
AND SHE WAS CURSED
BY MY GREAT GRANDMOTHER.
THE GYPSY CURSE CAUSE
SHE WAS A GYPSY .
AND SHE CURSED HER WITH GIRLS
AND HER GIRLS WITH GIRLS AND
HER GIRLS WITH GIRLS AND
THEY'D ALL BE LIKE YOU.
AND PERHAPS I'VE CARRIED IT ON
BY WISHING THE SAME ON TONI.
WHO KNOWS?
ONLY TIME WILL TELL.
CURSED OR OTHERWISE,
TONI ASSISTED BY HER MOM
AND GRANDMOTHER, GAVE
BIRTH TO CHARLIE.
CHARLIE'S DAD
WASN'T ON THE SCENE.
BUT THEN SHE GOT TOGETHER
WITH AN OLD FRIEND
AND TONI'S LIFE TOOK
A NEW DIRECTION.
THEY HAD TWO MORE
CHILDREN TOGETHER.
AND TWO YEARS AGO, BOUGHT
THEIR FIRST FAMILY HOME.
COMPLETE WITH THE
FIRST FAMILY PET, NEO.
AND IT'S NEO WHO'S NOW
PROVIDING CHARLIE
WITH A POWERFUL LESSON
IN RIGHT AND WRONG.
HE'S BEEN DOGNAPPED.
&nbsp WHO'S KEEPING NEO?
A OLD MAN WHO PICKED HIM UP
FROM OUR GARDEN AROUND THERE.
&nbspDO YOU KNOW WHO TOOK HIM?
NO.
HE WAS SITTING ABOUT HERE AND
SOMEONE OBVIOUSLY BENT OVER
THE FENCE BECAUSE
ALL THIS IS BROKEN.
I WOULD HAVE RATHER SOMEONE
COME IN THE HOUSE,
TAKEN EVERY BIT OF
GOLD I HAD.
YOU KNOW THE TELE, ANYTHING.
YOU KNOW, ABSOLUTELY ANYTHING.
IT JUST GOT TO ME TO
THINK THEY GOT OUR DOG.
&nbspIS YOUR MOMMY UPSETT?
SOMETIMES.
&nbspHOW DO YOU KNOW WHEEN
&nbspYOUR MOMMY'S UPSET?
BECAUSE WHEN DADDY SHOUTS
AT HER, SHE CRIES.
HELLO, SORRY TO
BOTHER YOU, I HAD MY DOG,
I THINK HE WAS STOLEN...
WHILE TONI GETS
ON THE PHONE,
CHARLIE IS OUT
LOOKING FOR CLUES.
I FOUND SOMETHING!
IT'S GOING THAT WAY.
&nbsp ANY SIGN?
NO.
WITH NO SIGN OF
NEO IN THE GARDEN,
CHARLIE TAKES THE
SEARCH TO SCHOOL.
CHARLIE'S TEACHER TURNS IT TO
A LESSON FOR THE WHOLE CLASS.
&nbspOH, WHAT'S THIS?
&nbspMY DOGGY.
&nbspYOUR DOGGY.
&nbspLETS HOPE THAT
&nbspYOU FIND HIM.
&nbspIS HE A KIND DOG?
&nbspYES?
MORAL VALUES, CODES,
RULES, BOUNDARIES,
THEY'RE EVERYWHERE IN SOCIETY.
SO WE SET ASIDE THE RULES
THAT WE THINK ARE IMPORTANT
AND THEN WE SORT OF
TRY AND ENFORCE THEM.
BUT AT HOME THE MESSAGES
CHARLIE'S GETTING ARE LESS
STRAIGHT FORWARD.
BECAUSE I'M STILL
GROWING UP NOW,
I CHANGE VIEWS EVERY
OTHER DAY SO IT'S HARD
TO TRY AND SIT THERE AND SAY
THIS IS THIS AND THAT'S THAT,
BECAUSE I MIGHT FEEL DIFFERENT.
ALTHOUGH I'VE SAID TO
HER THIS IS WHAT YOU DO,
SHE'S GOT HER OWN VIEWS AND
SHE'S GOT HER OWN MIND.
AND SHE KNOWS SOMETIMES
I&nbsp AM WRONG YOU KNOW.
OUTSIDE SCHOOL, CHARLIE'S
EXPERIENCE OF RIGHT AND WRONG
IS FULL OF GREY AREAS.
THAT NIGHT NEO TURNS
UP ON THE DOORSTEP
WITH A STRANGER
DEMANDING CASH.
THE NEXT DAY TONI IS STILL
UPSET ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED.
SHE SAID IF THEY
GIVE OUR DOG BACK
THEY WANT MONEY
FOR A NEW DOG.
SO ROB OFFERED HER
FIFTY POUNDS
AND SHE TOOK IT LIKE
WITHOUT ANYTHING.
BUT I SAID TO HIM IF I FOUND IT,
I WOULDN'T EXPECT A REWARD.
I WOULD BE LIKE THERE'S YOUR
DOG. YOU'VE MISSED HIM.
HAVE YOUR BACK SORT OF THING.
AND CHARLIE HAS SEEN FIRST
HAND THAT CRIME SOMETIMES PAYS.
WHEN ROB SAID CAN
WE HAVE OUR DOG BACK?
AND THEN SHE SAID UM,
IF YOU WANT TO BUY
THIS DOG, PAY FOR IT.
CHARLIE IS SEEING DIFFERENT
MODELS OF RIGHT AND WRONG
AT HOME AND AT SCHOOL.
SO WHAT'S SHE PICKING UP?
AT NEARLY SIX WHAT DO
OUR CHILDREN KNOW ABOUT
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
RIGHT AND WRONG?
WE SET THEM A TEST.
WHAT IS WORSE, LEAVING
YOUR ROOM UNTIDY,
OR KICKING YOUR
FAMILY PET?
THAT ONE.
STEALING SWEETS OR
NOT SAYING THANK YOU?
MOST OF THE CHILDREN KNEW
THAT KICKING OR STEALING
WERE WORSE THAN
TALKING IN CLASS
OR LEAVING YOUR
ROOM UNTIDY.
SCIENTIST THINK THIS
ABILITY TO DISTINGUISH
WHAT IS MORALLY WRONG FROM WHAT
IS MERELY A SOCIAL CONVENTION
STARTS WHEN WE ARE
AS YOUNG AS 4.
WHAT ABOUT CHARLIE?
&nbsp NATASHA NEVER SAYS THANK YOU.
&nbsp GWEN STEALS HER FRIENDS TOY.
&nbsp WHO'S THE NAUGHTIEST?
&nbsp NATASHA?
&nbsp WHY?
BECAUSE SHE
DOESN'T SAY THANK YOU.
&nbsp JOE?
&nbsp WHY?
CAUSE.
OUT OF FIVE QUESTIONS
CHARLIE ONLY GOT IT RIGHT
IN TWO CASES.
SHE SEEMS TO FEEL THAT
MANNERS ARE MORE IMPORTANT
THAN HITTING OR STEALING.
BUT FOR ONE CHILD THERE
WAS ABSOLUTELY NO DOUBT.
I THINK THAT ONE.
&nbsp WHO DO YOU THINK
&nbsp IS THE NAUGHTIEST?
&nbsp WHY?
BECAUSE SHE KICKS.
SO WHERE DID EVE LEARN
WITH SUCH CERTAINTY
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
RIGHT AND WRONG?
IT'S EASTER IN WORCESTERSHIRE.
EVE SCABOROUGH IS LEADING
HER CLASS UP TO CHURCH
FOR THEIR EASTER SERVICE.
BUT THERE'S
TEMPTATION IN THE WAY.
THESE LOOK YUMMY DON'T THEY?
I'M NOT TEMPTED TO EAT THESE,
BUT I AM TEMPTED TO EAT
THAT ONE BUT NOT ALL THOSE
ONES, THE RED ONES.
I AM TEMPTED TO EAT THOSE.
BUT EVE KNOWS WHAT COULD
HAPPEN IF SHE DOESN'T RESIST.
I MIGHT NOT GO TO HEAVEN
I MIGHT GO TO THE OTHER
BAD PLACE INSTEAD.
I MIGHT GO THERE.
NOW WHAT DOES THIS MAKE YOU
THINK OF IN THE EASTER STORY?
IT'S NOT JUST FROM
SCHOOL AND CHURCH
THAT SHE'S PICKED
UP HER VALUES.
MOM CAROLINE AND DAD TIM
BELIEVE THAT PRAYER
CHANGES LIVES.
SIX YEARS AGO THEY'D GIVEN
UP ALL HOPE OF HAVING A BABY.
AND THEN CAME EVE.
IT IS A MIRACLE.
IT IS UNEXPLAINABLE.
WHEN SHE WAS BORN IT WAS JUST
SUCH A HAPPY MOMENT YOU KNOW.
I JUST KINDA FELT
LIKE A HERO
AND I WAS SAUNTERING
ALONG YOU KNOW.
BUT THEN TIM LOST HIS JOB AND
CAROLINE WENT THROUGH SEVERE
POST NATAL DEPRESSION.
PRAYER SAVED THEM AGAIN.
AND THEN GAVE THEM THE
OPPORTUNITY TO WORK FOR GOD.
THEY NOW MANAGE A
CHRISTIAN RETREAT CENTER.
AND EVE HAS BEEN BROUGHT
UP TO FIRMLY BELIEVE
THAT RIGHT WILL
TRIUMPH OVER WRONG.
WE DON'T REALLY MENTION ARE
NEEDS TO ANYBODY.
BUT OBVIOUSLY WE PRAY ABOUT
THEM BECAUSE THAT'S PART OF
WHO WE ARE AND GOD
DELIVERS EVERY TIME.
DEAR LORD JESUS THANK
YOU FOR THIS LOVELY DAY.
PLEASE DON'T WAIT TO SORT HER
WEE BETTER AMEN.
AMEN.
THE SCABOROUGH'S IDEA OF
WHAT'S RIGHT AND WHAT'S WRONG
COME DIRECTLY
FROM THEIR FAITH.
MOST THINGS THAT
HAPPEN IN MY LIFE,
I DEEM TO HAVE COME
FAIRLY DIRECT FROM GOD.
GOODNIGHT.
I LOVE YOU.
SOMEWHERE ALONG THE LINE
GOD IS INVOLVED AND HOPEFULLY
DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
SO IF I SEE SOMEONE IN NEED,
AND I'VE GOT THE THING THAT
THEY NEED, THEN I WOULD
CONSIDER GIVING IT TO THEM.
TIM'S PRINCIPLES ARE
ABOUT TO BE PUT TO THE TEST.
ONE HUNDRED MILES AWAY IN
SUSSEX TIM'S BROTHER ANDREW'S
KIDNEYS HAVE PACKED UP.
THIS IS MY FISTULA WHICH IS AN
OPERATION I HAD WHEN MY KIDNEY
FIRST FAILED, SO THAT
WAS BACK IN 1985.
SO THESE ARE THE
ACTUAL NEEDLES.
SO IT'S A BIT MORE THAN THE
KIND OF NEEDLE YOU USE WHEN
YOU TAKE BLOOD.
YOU CAN SEE THE SIZE OF IT.
&nbspDOES IT HURT?
IF YOU GET A FRESH
BIT YES IT DOES HURT.
AFTER 15 YEARS OF
DIALYSIS THREE TIMES A WEEK,
HE DESPERATELY NEEDS
A KIDNEY TRANSPLANT.
WE CONNECT UP TO
THE OLD MACHINE.
THIS IS PART OF LIFE.
YOU GOTTA GET ON WITH IT.
YOU CAN ACCEPT IT
AND WORK WITH IT.
THERE IS NOT MUCH
OF AN ALTERNATIVE.
SO YA THIS IS ME
TILL TEA TIME.
OR BEYOND.
BUT THERE IS ONE
POSSIBLE ALTERNATIVE.
&nbsp SHOW ME WHERE
&nbsp YOUR KIDNEY IS.
JUST UP HERE.
HOW MANY YOU
GOT THERE?
I MIGHT ONLY HAVE ONE.
&nbsp I THINK YOU'VE
&nbsp GOT TWO.
WHY?
&nbsp EVERYBODY HAS TWO
&nbsp APART FROM ANDREW.
HE HAS NONE!
EVE'S DAD TIM HAS
OFFERED TO GIVE ONE
OF HIS KIDNEYS TO ANDREW.
THEY'VE GOT TO TAKE SOMETHING
THAT HELPS YOU...
DADDY'S GOT TWO AND HE
HAS TO GIVE ONE AWAY.
TIM'S IN LONDON TO CONFIRM
WITH A HETO-SUITABLE DONOR.
APPARENTLY I'M AN EXACT MATCH
AS FAR AS BLOOD IS CONCERNED,
WITH MY BROTHER.
WHICH MEANS TISSUE TYPING WISE
IT'S FAIRLY LIKELY THAT I'LL
BE A GOOD MATCH OR VERY LIKELY
THAT I'LL BE A GOOD MATCH.
DON'T FOR A MINUTE
UNDERESTIMATE THE SIZE
OF THE OPERATION.
IT'S A MUCH BIGGER OP
FOR YOU
THAN IT'S GOING TO
BE FOR ANDREW.
DON'T EVEN THINK
ABOUT WORKING ETC.,
AT ALL UNTIL A GOOD SIX
WEEKS HAVE GONE BY
AND IF IT TAKES
TWELVE WEEKS,
IT TAKES TWELVE WEEKS.
THE STAKES ARE HIGH
FOR TIM AND HIS FAMILY
BUT HIS BELIEFS DICTATE
THAT IF HE CAN HELP
HIS BROTHER, HE SHOULD
WHATEVER THE RISKS.
FOR ME DYING ISN'T SOMETHING
THAT I'M FRIGHTENED OF BECAUSE
OF MY FAITH, SO I DON'T
WORRY ABOUT IT FOR MYSELF
AS A SEPARATE INDIVIDUAL.
IT'S NO PROBLEM AT ALL.
OBVIOUSLY THERE IS WIVES
AND DAUGHTERS AND MOMS
TO THINK ABOUT.
AND BROTHERS I GUESS.
&nbsp ARE YOU WORRIED
&nbsp ABOUT DADDY?
NO.
NOT FAIRLY WORRIED.
&nbsp BUT A LITTLE BIT
&nbsp WORRIED?
AND SUDDENLY THERE IS
SOMEONE ELSE IN THE FAMILY
TO WORRY ABOUT AS WELL.
I WAS FEELING RATHER
ILL I THINK IN APRIL.
I PUT IT DOWN TO FEELING WEIRD
BECAUSE I'D STARTED THE G.I.
DIET AND IT BECAME
EVIDENT THAT IT WASN'T
THE G.I. DIET AND IN FACT I
WAS EIGHT WEEKS PREGNANT.
IT WAS A LARGE SHOCK
BECAUSE WE WERE TOLD
THAT WE'D NEVER HAVE CHILDREN
ANYWAY, AND THEN EVE CAME ALONG
AND WE THOUGHT THAT'S
GREAT YOU KNOW,
AND I WAS VERY CONTENT
WITH JUST HAVING HER.
SHE WAS ENOUGH AND I GOT
PLANS FOR MY LIFE AND THEN...
SO IT WAS A HUGE
SHOCK TO BOTH OF US
AND A LOT OF
READJUSTMENT.
WE WEREN'T PRAYING FOR IT BUT
EVE WAS SINCE SHE COULD SPEAK.
WE BLAME HER ACTUALLY.
I'VE BEEN PRAYING THAT THE
BABY WILL BE A BABY GIRL.
&nbsp WHY?
BECAUSE I WANT IT TO.
BUT CAROLINE'S
PREGNANCY IS TURNING OUT
TO BE A VERY ROUGH RIDE.
I JUST VOMIT DAY AND NIGHT
AND THEN I DEVELOPED
AN IRREGULAR HEART PATTERN
AND GOT ADMITTED TO HOSPITAL
AND PUT ON BETA BLOCKERS AND
THEY STILL DON'T KNOW WHY.
IT'S STILL BEING INVESTIGATED.
EVE'S PARENTS' FAITH MAY
PREVENT THEM FROM WORRYING
ABOUT DEATH BUT ALL THESE
PROBLEMS ARE GETTING TO EVE.
YOU KNOW ABOUT
THE BABY?
MY MOM SAID THE NURSE SAID
THE BABY'S GONNA BE POORLY
WHEN IT COMES OUT
OF HER TUMMY.
THAT MEANS SHE'LL
DIE SOON, MY MOM WILL.
YOUR MOM
WOULD DIE?
SOON.
OH NO.
IF YOUR MOM
DIES...
OH NO.
I THOUGHT YOU WERE
TALKING THE BABY WOULD DIE?
NO THE BABY
MIGHT DIE.
MOMMY MIGHT DIE.
I KNOW ALL ABOUT
BABIES AND THINGS.
ME TOO.
WELL I'LL TELL
YOU WHAT I KNOW.
I KNOW HOW THE
BABY'S GONNA BE BORN.
IT'S GONNA BE
BORN DEAD!
BUT WHAT DOES SIX YEAR OLDS
THINK HAPPENS WHEN YOU DIE?
I TURN INTO SKIN AND BONES.
YOUR BONES GO IN A BOX.
I WON'T BE ABLE TO MOVE.
YOU LIVE WITH GOD.
SOMETIMES IF YOUR A KID YOU
GET A LITTLE PICTURE OF YOU.
YOU GO TO
HEAVEN.
YOU GO TO HEAVEN.
A HUNDRED YEARS AGO,
OVER HALF OUR CHILDREN
WERE SENT TO
SUNDAY SCHOOL.
NOW, IT'S WELL UNDER 5%.
SO DOES THAT MEAN THAT
OUR SIX YEAR OLDS
ARE GROWING UP IN
GODLESS HOUSEHOLDS?
I DO BELIEVE IN GHOSTS.
YOU'RE ONLY HERE
ONCE SO GO FOR IT.
ENJOY IT WHILE YOU CAN.
I WILL GO TO HEAVEN.
&nbsp BECAUSE?
BECAUSE I'M AN ANGEL.
&nbsp WHAT DOES GOD
&nbsp LOOK LIKE?
HOPEFULLY SOMETHING ATTRACTIVE
AND EASY ON THE EYE.
BECAUSE WE'RE GONNA BE
SPENDING ETERNITY WITH HIM
AFTER ALL SO..
BEING JEWISH IS NOT JUST
A RELIGION, IT'S A LIFESTYLE.
IT'S A WAY OF LIFE.
IT MEANS EVERYTHING TO ME.
I WOULDN'T SAY THAT I'M
A RELIGIOUS PERSON,
BUT I DO BELIEVE IN KARMA.
I DO BELIEVE IN CONSEQUENCES
FOR YOUR ACTIONS.
I THINK PEOPLES VALUES
HAVE CHANGED IMMENSELY.
I THINK IT'S ALL ABOUT
THEMSELVES AND WHAT I WANT OUT
OF LIFE WHETHER IT BE
GOOD, BAD OR INDIFFERENT,
YOU JUST GO FOR
WHAT YOU WANT.
AMBITION IS MARIE
BLAKE'S MANTRA.
IS SHE PASSING IT
ON TO HER FAMILY?
THEY LIVE NEAR
SPAGHETTI JUNCTION
IN INNER CITY BIRMINGHAM.
HER SON TYRESE IS THE ONLY
BOY IN A HOUSE FULL OF FEMALES.
AND HE'S LEARNED TO
STAND UP FOR HIMSELF.
I WANT THIS SONG!
YOU CAN'T RECK THE MACHINE!
IF I SEE HIM A BIT AGGRESSIVE,
I DON'T THINK THAT'S JUST
A BOY THING BUT HE SEEMS
TO STILL BE A BIT..
KNOCK PEOPLE OUT
OF THE WAY.
I WANT TO GET PAST,
JUST MOVE KINDA THING.
IF HE WANTS SOMETHING THEN HE'S
QUITE DETERMINED TO GET IT.
WHICH IS A GOOD THING.
WHAT I WANT HIM TO KNOW
IS, YES BE ASSERTIVE,
GO FOR WHAT YOU WANT BUT
THERE'S WAYS AND MEANS
OF DOING IT, WITHOUT
UPSETTING OTHER PEOPLE.
WHAT'S HE LIKE AS A BROTHER?
HE'S A PEST TO MAKE
HIMSELF GET WHAT HE WANTS
AND HE HAS TO BE THE
CENTER OF ATTENTION
AND IF HE DON'T GET
HIS, HE CRIES.
ANNOYING, RUDE, BAD BEHAVIOR.
HE HAS A BAD REPUTATION.
TYRESE HAS HAD A
DIFFICULT FEW YEARS.
HIS MOM ALWAYS FELT THAT
HIS LIFE MIGHT NOT BE EASY.
I THINK TYRESE WILL HAVE
A HARDER TIME COMPARED
TO SOME OF THE
OTHER CHILDREN.
YES, BECAUSE HE'S BLACK.
BUT ALSO BECAUSE
HE'S A BLACK MALE.
THE THING THAT I'M WORRIED
ABOUT IS MORE SO ABOUT HIM
GETTING INTO
TROUBLE WITH THE POLICE,
GOING DOWN THE DRUGS ROUTE,
GETTING INTO FIGHTS, GUNS,
ALL THAT KIND OF STUFF IS
WHAT I'M REALLY REALLY
WORRIED ABOUT.
THAT'S WHY MARIE WANTED
TYRESE TO BE TOUGH MINDED
AND TO GET WHAT HE WANTS
JUST LIKE HIS MOM.
MARIE'S ALWAYS GONE
FOR WHAT SHE WANTS.
TWO YEARS AGO, MARIE DECIDED
TO LEAVE TYRESE'S DAD
AND SHE AND THE CHILDREN
MOVED HOUSE TWICE.
IT HAS AN EFFECT ON TYRESE.
THE SCHOOL SORT OF ASK ME TO
GO IN AND HAVE A WORD AND THEY
WERE CONCERNED SAYING THAT
HIS BEHAVIOR AT SCHOOL
IS BECOMING QUITE BAD.
WHERE HE'S NOT
LISTENING TO ANYTHING
THAT THERE TELLING
HIM TO DO.
WHEN THEY SAY SIT DOWN,
HE WILL STAND UP AND,
ALWAYS THE OPPOSITE OF
WHAT HE IS BEING TOLD.
HE WOULD WET HIMSELF.
HE WOULD BEAT ANYONE
WHO CAME IN HIS PATH.
HE WOULDN'T DO
WHAT HE WAS TOLD.
HE WAS JUST REALLY DEFIANT.
A YEAR ON NOT
MUCH HAS CHANGED.
I'LL PUT THIS IN
YOUR EYE.
TYRESE KNOWS WHAT HE WANTS
BUT HE HASN'T YET DEVELOPED
THE WAYS AND MEANS
TO GET IT.
YOU CAN'T TAKE YOUR EYES
OFF HIM FOR TOO LONG YOU KNOW
OTHERWISE HE MIGHT BE
INTERFERING WITH SOMEBODY
ELSE'S WORK OR...
JUST WHAT THEIR DOING.
HE STILL HAS ISSUES WITH
SOCIALIZING WITH THE CHILDREN
AT TIMES, ALTHOUGH HE IS QUITE
A POPULAR MEMBER OF THE CLASS
AND THEY DO LIKE TO PLAY WITH
HIM, BUT HE TENDS TO ANNOY THEM
AT TIMES AND IRRITATE THEM.
BUT WHEN HE'S
PUT ON THE SPOT,
HE KNOWS EXACTLY
WHAT HE SHOULD DO.
&nbspHOW CAN WE BE
&nbspGOOD IN SCHOOL?
&nbspTYRESE, WHAT DID
&nbspYOU SAY WE COULD DO.
SIT QUIETLY.
&nbspWHY DO YOU NEED
&nbspTO SIT QUIETLY?
SO YOU CAN LISTEN.
&nbspCAN YOU THINK OF ANY
&nbspOTHER ONES TYRESE?
PLAY WITH YOUR
FRIENDS NICELY.
THE PLAY NICELY CAN
MEAN DIFFERENT THINGS
TO DIFFERENT PEOPLE.
TYRESE THINKS IT'S HIS
FRIEND MICHAEL'S TURN
TO HAVE THE SCOOTER.
GIVE IT TO MICHAEL.
CAN WE GIVE IT
TO MICHAEL?
NO, YOU HURT
HIM NOW.
&nbspI'M HAVING THE
&nbspSCOOTER.
&nbspYOU COME
&nbspWITH ME.
TYRESE'S WELL
MEANING INTERVENTION,
HAS LANDED HIM IN TROUBLE.
AND HE HASN'T GOT THE
COMMUNICATION SKILLS
TO GET HIMSELF OUT OF IT.
&nbsp OKAY LOOK, YOU
&nbsp HURT HIS MOUTH.
&nbsp WHAT DO YOU SAY?
SORRY.
THE ONLY LOSER
HERE IS TYRESE.
BUT CAN HE NEGOTIATE
IN OTHER SITUATIONS?
WE ASKED OUR PARENTS TO
DELIBERATELY KNOCK OVER THESE
MARBLES AND THEN TO ASK THEIR
CHILDREN NOT TO TELL ON THEM.
DON'T TELL THEM
IT WAS MOMMY OKAY?
LYING ON BEHALF OF OTHER
PEOPLE IS A STAGE OF MORAL
DEVELOPMENT NOT USUALLY
REACHED UNTIL EIGHT OR NINE.
NOT SURPRISINGLY, MOST OF OUR
CHILDREN WERE NOT THERE YET.
MOM!!
THEY WERE SO EAGER TO
TELL ON THEIR PARENTS,
THAT THEY CAME
LOOKING FOR US.
COME HERE.
&nbsp DADDY DROPPED
&nbsp THE MARBLES!
BUT HOW WOULD
TYRESE GET ON?
&nbspWHO WAS IT?
&nbspHOW COME THEY'RE ON
&nbspTHE FLOOR?
THE CONFLICT BETWEEN BEING
TOUGH MINDED, WITHOUT HAVING
THE SKILLS TO CARRY IT
OFF, LEAVES HIM SILENT.
&nbspWAS IT MOMMY
&nbspTYRESE?
&nbspWELL THERE ARE TWO
&nbspPEOPLE IN ONE ROOM...
&nbspDID YOU TOUCH
&nbspTHEM?
BUT THERE WAS ONE CHILD THAT
SIMPLY DIDN'T TELL ON HIS MOM
BUT SOLD HER
RIGHT DOWN THE RIVER.
PLEASE DON'T TELL
ON MOMMY.
DON'T TELL THEM!
SO WHERE DID NATHAN LEARN
TO TAKE SO MUCH DELIGHT
IN SHOPPING HIS MOM?
HE'S LIVED ALL HIS LIFE HERE.
IN THE SMALL MARKET
TOWN OF GALSTON,
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
AYRSHIRE HILLS.
AT SCHOOL, NATHAN PRICE IS
A STICKLER FOR THE RULES.
WE'RE ALLOWED TO RUN
BUT NOT IN THE CLASSROOM.
WE RUN OUTSIDE.
&nbspWHY DO YOU THINK
&nbspWE NEED RULES?
&nbspNATHAN.
SO WE KNOW
WHAT TO DO.
&nbsp SO YOU KNOW EXACTLY
&nbsp WHAT TO DO.
&nbsp THAT'S RIGHT.
HE'S VERY AWARE
OF HELPING OTHERS.
VERY AWARE YES HE'S
A VERY KIND CHILD.
HE'S A VERY SETTLED CHILD.
HE'S JUST A WEE BOY
THAT'S JUST A PLEASURE
TO HAVE IN YOUR CLASS.
BUT LIKE ALL CHILDREN HE
ALSO WANTS TO BE POPULAR
WITH HIS SCHOOLMATES.
AND HE DOES THAT IN A
VERY DIFFERENT WAY.
HE'S GOOD AT DOING CROUCHING
AND JUMPING AND STUFF.
HE'S DOING LOADS
OF FIGHTING.
BUT NOT FOR LONG.
AT HOME, THE RULES EVEN
HAVE MORE STRUCTURE
EVEN IF THEY ARE A
LITTLE DIFFERENT.
NATHAN IS ENCOURAGED TO
MEDITATE ON A REGULAR BASIS.
HE WAS TAUGHT BY
HIS FATHER RICHARD.
A BUDDHIST WHO
MEDITATES EVERY DAY.
I WASN'T BORN A BUDDHIST.
I ALWAYS HAD A PROBLEM
WITH THE RELIGIONS...
THE STUFF THAT YOU
LEARNED AT SCHOOL,
LEARNED FROM YOUR FAMILY.
THAT NEVER SAT WELL WITH ME.
I THINK NATHAN IS THE TYPE
OF CHILD WHO BENEFITS
WELL FROM STRUCTURE.
HIS MOM RUTH IS
EQUALLY UNCONVENTIONAL.
LETS SEE IF YOU CAN
HUG A TREE COME ON.
HANDS AND STRETCH ME.
I DON'T FIT IN.
THAT'S VERY...
NO, I DON'T FIT IN.
I'M ONE OF THE MOMS THAT
DROPS THE KIDS OFF AT SCHOOL
AND I SMILE AT PEOPLE
BUT I DON'T REALLY
KNOW MANY PEOPLE
VERY WELL.
THEY NEVER HAVE FITTED IN.
WHEN THEY MOVED TO THE AYRSHIRE
COUNTRYSIDE TEN YEARS AGO,
THEY WERE DETERMINED TO
BRING THEIR CHILDREN UP
WITH THEIR OWN VALUES.
UNCONTAMINATED BY
MAINSTREAM SOCIETY.
IT'S AN IDEAL THERE
STILL TRYING TO PUT
INTO PRACTICE TODAY.
EVEN AT BEDTIME.
THE STORK STUFFED HIMSELF
WITH ALL THE PEACHES
HE COULD
POSSIBLY EAT.
WOULD YOU HAVE
DONE THAT?
I WOULD.
YOU WOULD HAVE TAKEN
ALL THE PEACHES
AND NOT LEFT ANY
FOR ANYONE ELSE?
I WOULD TAKE SOME.
YOU WOULD HAVE
TAKEN SOME.
YES.
WHAT DID THE BUDDHA
DO TO THE MONKEY?
HE TOLD HIM
WHAT TO DO.
THE RIGHT THING.
WHAT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
TEACHING OF THE BUDDHA?
DO NO HARM.
SAY IT AGAIN
NATHAN.
DO NO HARM.
COME THE WEEKEND,
NATHAN NEEDS TO GET OUT.
AND NOTHING, NOT EVEN
THE POURING RAIN CAN STOP
GALSTON'S KEENEST
BIRD WATCHER.
I COME IN HERE AND REST.
STAY REALLY QUIET.
SO TELL ME WHAT
BIRDS HAVE YOU SEEN?
WOODPECKERS, WOOD-PIGEON
AND A GREEN FINCH.
BUT THE BIRD BOX SERVES
ANOTHER PURPOSE AS WELL.
NOT JUST LOOKING FOR BIRDS,
BUT ESCAPING FROM HUMANS.
&nbspWHY DID YOU GO
&nbspIN THERE?
&nbsp SO NOBODY CAN
&nbsp FIND ME.
SOMETIMES THOUGH HE
JUST CAN'T GET AWAY.
SOMETIMES HE'S NASTY WHEN
WE COME BACK AFTER SCHOOL
AND SOMETIMES HE'S NASTY WHEN
WE'RE TAKING OUR FRIENDS HOME.
AND THEN WE ALWAYS HAVE
A CARRY ON IN THE CAR.
WELL HE HAVE IN
MY NOSE ONCE.
&nbspWHY?
OUCH!
BECAUSE WE WERE
FIGHTING TOGETHER.
OUCH!
AND THEN MEDITATION
SERVES ANOTHER PURPOSE.
&nbsp WHY DO YOU HAVE THIS
&nbsp SHRINE IN YOUR BEDROOM?
BECAUSE IF I'VE BEEN BAD I
HAVE TO THINK WHAT I'VE DONE.
&nbsp WHAT ARE YOU
&nbsp THINKING ABOUT?
NEVER GET INTO TROUBLE.
FOR ALL OF US, STRONG
VALUES AND ABSOLUTE RULES
CAN BE VERY HARD
TO LIVE UP TO.
IN BIRMINGHAM, TYRESES MOM'S
COMMITMENT TO HER PRINCIPLES
MEANS THINGS ARE
CHANGING FOR THE FAMILY.
MARIA'S CONCERNED THAT
LIKE MANY BLACK BOYS,
TYRESE MAY NOT THRIVE
IN BRITAIN AND SO
MISS OUT ON THE OPPORTUNITIES
OPEN TO HIS WHITE PEERS.
SO SHE'S CONTEMPLATING
A BIG GAMBLE,
IN THE GAMBIA.
I HAVE A FIFTEEN YEAR PLAN,
AND BY THE FIFTEEN
YEARS ARE UP
I WILL HAVE THREE PROPERTIES
IN THREE COUNTRIES.
SO GAMBIA IS THE FIRST,
THEN THE CARIBBEAN
AND KEEP YOUR FINGERS
CROSSED, MAYBE AMERICA.
IT'S NICE TO SEE THE BLACK
PEOPLE IN HIGH POSITIONS
AND YOU GUYS ARE
THE MINORITY.
MARIE HAS DECIDED TO
BUY SOME LAND HERE.
BUT TO DO BUSINESS
IN THE GAMBIA,
SHE IS FINDING YOU
HAVE TO DUCK AND DIVE
JUST AS MUCH AS
IN BIRMINGHAM.
THERE IS NO WAY I'M GONNA
BE SPENDING 16 AND 20 GRAND.
I AIN'T GOT THAT
KIND OF MONEY.
THEY LOOK AT WHAT YOU'RE
PAYING IN ENGLAND
AND THEY'RE SAYING THEY
WANT THE SAME HERE.
IT DOESN'T WORK LIKE THAT.
YOU HAVEN'T GOT
THE INFRASTRUCTURE.
YOU HAVEN'T GOT RUNNING WATER,
YOU HAVEN'T GOT ELECTRICITY.
AND YOU HAVEN'T GOT
TELEPHONE POINTS.
YOU GOTTA LOOK AT THAT.
IT'S NOT REALISTIC.
WHILE SHE'S AWAY, TYRESE
AND HIS SISTER TANISHA
ARE WITH THEIR
GRANDMOTHER BEVERLY.
TELL ME WHAT ISN'T BORING?
EVERYTHING IS BORING.
BEVERLY LIVES
JUST DOWN THE ROAD.
AND OVER THE YEARS HAS SPENT
A LOT OF TIME WITH TYRESE.
HE'S GOT A VERY
STRONG CHARACTER HERE.
HE'S GOT ACTUALLY
A NICE CHARACTER.
ACTUALLY I LIKE TYRESE.
HE HAS A TIME WHEN HE
DOESN'T LIKE PEOPLE.
DOESN'T WANT TO TALK
TO ANYONE
BUT I ALWAYS SEEM TO ABLE
TO SWITCH HIM AROUND.
PEOPLE'S FIRST
IMPRESSION OF TYRESE
IS THAT HE'S BOISTEROUS,
HE'S A BOY AND ALL THAT.
BUT IT'S NOT LIKE THAT.
I THINK A CHILD HAS A RIGHT TO
BE ANGRY OR EXPRESS HIMSELF
IN A CERTAIN WAY.
YOU KNOW I DO THINK
THE CHILD SHOULD,
AND HE DID.
IT MAY BE THIS INSIGHT
THAT SETS TYRESE
AT EASE IN HER COMPANY AND
HELPS HIS STRENGTHS COME OUT.
IF YOU GIVE HIM
PROJECTS TO DO
HIS TAKES IT RIGHT
THROUGH TO THE END.
HE'S VERY GOOD THAT WAY.
SO HE'S PICKED UP
THAT VALUE FROM HIS MOM.
SHE'S NEGOTIATED BUYING A
PLOT OF LAND WHICH SHE HOPES
WILL BECOME THE FIRST OF THE
FAMILIES PROPERTY EMPIRE.
YOU'VE GOT THE SUN.
YOU'VE GOT
THE SEA.
IT'S A MORE LEISURELY PACE.
PEOPLE ARE STILL
MAKING A LIVING,
BUT IT'S NOT THAT
CUT THROAT, FAST PACE.
EVEN IF YOU LOOK
AT PEOPLE WALKING,
IT'S A LEISURELY STROLL.
WHEN I SHOW THIS GAMBIAN
PERSON HOW WE WALK IN ENGLAND,
SHE'S LIKE NO
AND I'M LIKE YAH.
MARIE HOPES THAT THE GAMBIA
WILL BE A LITTLE MORE
THAN JUST AN ENTREPRENEURIAL
OPPORTUNITY.
I WANT MY CHILDREN
TO EXPERIENCE LIFE,
NOT JUST ONE
PART OF THE WORLD.
I WANT THEM TO KNOW DIFFERENT
ASPECTS OF THE WORLD..
STIMULATE THEIR
IMAGINATION A BIT MORE.
&nbspCOAT ON.
NO!
&nbspGET IT ON THEN.
A FEW WEEKS LATER, THE
GAMBIA SEEMS A LONG WAY AWAY
AS THE FAMILY HEADS INTO
BIRMINGHAM'S RUSH HOUR.
BUT THE EXPERIENCE
HASN'T BEEN WASTED.
GAMBIA'S BRING ME ON TO
SORT OF SAY THE THINGS
THAT I WANT TO
ACHIEVE.
THAT IF I WANT THE LIFE
THAT I WANT TO LIVE IN GAMBIA,
I GOT TO DO
SOMETHING ABOUT IT,
WHICH IS ONE OF THE REASONS
WHY I WANT TO OPEN UP A SHOP.
MARIA'S FURTHERING
HER AMBITION
TO MAKE LIFE BETTER
FOR HER FAMILY.
BUT IS TYRESE DEVELOPING HIS
ABILITY TO GET WHAT HE WANTS?
WE ASKED THE CHILDREN TO MOVE
THESE BALLS FROM ONE CONTAINER
TO ANOTHER USING A
COMPLETELY UNSUITABLE SPOON.
IT'S AN IMPOSSIBLE
TASK, SO WILL THEY CHEAT?
IN SIMILAR EXPERIMENTS,
SCIENTIST ALL OVER THE WORLD
HAVE OBSERVED THAT VIRTUALLY
ALL YOUNG CHILDREN
WILL HAVE A GO.
THEN,
THEY WILL CHEAT.
EVEN UNDER COMMUNISM.
BUT WILL THEY ADMIT IT?
THE RUSSIAN CHILDREN DIDN'T.
ALL OUR CHILDREN
CHEATED TOO.
THEY'RE LEARNING THAT
SOMETIMES YOU HAVE TO
BEND THE RULES TO
GET THINGS DONE.
BUT WOULD THEY ADMIT IT?
&nbspDID YOU USE
&nbspYOUR HANDS?
NO.
HOW ABOUT TYRESE?
&nbspDID YOU TOUCH THEM
&nbspWITH YOUR HANDS?
YES.
SOME.
SOME WITH MY HANDS.
THE ONES THAT FALLED OUT.
COURAGEOUSLY, TYRESE WAS
ONE OF THE FEW WHO DIDN'T LIE.
IT SEEMS HE'S FINDING
OUT THAT IT'S POSSIBLE
TO ARGUE YOUR
CORNER.
WHAT ABOUT EVE?
&nbsp DID YOU USE
&nbsp YOUR HANDS?
NO.
NOT VERY MUCH.
I DON'T THINK
I DID.
SHE DOESN'T WANT TO LIE
BUT SHE ALSO DOESN'T WANT
TO BE SEEN TO BE BREAKING
THE RULES.
IT'S ONLY ONE OF THE MANY
DILEMMAS IN HER LIFE
AT THE MOMENT.
IT'S SPORTS DAY
REHEARSAL AT SCHOOL
BUT EVE'S MIND IS ON HER
MOM AND THE UNBORN BABY.
IT'S STRANGE REALLY.
SHE WENT TO THE
HOSPITAL YESTERDAY.
WELL, THERE'S JUST A
LITTLE SORT OF AN OPERATION.
TIP THERE WINGS LIKE THAT...
I WAS QUITE ILL, VERY SICK.
I HAD TOO MUCH ADRENALINE
WHICH WAS MAKING ME FEEL
LIKE I JUST HAD A
CAR SMASH.
THEY THOUGHT THE CAUSE OF THE
ADRENALINE RUSH MIGHT BE
THAT I HAD A TUMOR IN
MY ADRENAL GLAND.
WHICH I DON'T HAVE BUT I
STILL HAVE ALL THE SYMPTOMS.
AND I THINK I JUST GOT
TO THE POINT WHERE
I THOUGHT THIS IS NEVER ENDING
AND COULDN'T HANDLE IT REALLY.
IN SUSSEX, EVE'S UNCLE
ANDREW IS FINDING LIFE
INCREASINGLY HARD
TO HANDLE TOO.
I'M STARTING TO BECOME
A LITTLE BIT WEAKER.
NOT DAY BY DAY.
IT'S NOT AS RAPID AS THAT.
IT'S SORT OF TIRED AND WEAK
RATHER THAN ILL PARTICULARLY.
JUST GRADUALLY YOUR
QUALITY OF LIFE GOES DOWNHILL.
EVE'S AUNT HALEY IS
CONFIDENT THAT TIM
WILL HONOR HIS PROMISE.
KNOWING TIM AS I DO, HE'S GOT
A VERY STRONG CHRISTIAN FAITH
AS I HAVE AS WELL AND HE'S THE
SORT OF PERSON THAT WILL THINK
ABOUT THINGS AND IF HE CAN
HELP TIM WOULD WANT TO HELP.
AND HE DOES WANT TO HELP.
BUT TIM HAS BEEN TOLD BY THE
DOCTORS THAT HE'S GOT TO LOSE
TWO STONE BEFORE THE
TRANSPLANT CAN GO AHEAD.
HE'S ALLOWED
THINGS LIKE OATS.
BREAD IS GOOD.
COUNTING TIM'S CALORIES ON
TOP OF A DIFFICULT PREGNANCY
IS A BURDEN.
&nbspHOW ABOUT FRUIT?
FRUIT WITH
CARE REALLY.
DEPENDS ON THE SORT
OF FRUIT
AND SLIGHTLY
UNDER-RIPE REALLY.
&nbspDOES HE EVER
&nbspCHEAT?
OH GOSH YES.
NO I DON'T CHEAT.
I JUST DON'T KNOW THAT
I'VE RIDDEN OFF THE RAILS.
FOR WHAT WE ARE ABOUT
TO RECEIVE MAY THE...
AAH....MEN.
ALL DONE.
EAGLE EYED EVE CAN
SEE IT'S A STRUGGLE.
HE'S LOST HALF A STONE.
NOW JUST LOSE THE
WHOLE STONE.
HE ONLY EATS PORRIDGE AND
VEGETABLES AND FRUITS NOW.
&nbsp DOES HE EVER
&nbsp CHEAT?
HE ATE SHORTBREAD
LAST WEEK.
THERE ARE TEMPTATIONS
THAT I'VE DEALT WITH
AND CONTINUE TO BE ABLE TO
DEAL WITH EFFECTIVELY.
FOOD ISN'T ONE OF THEM.
CHIPS AND MANY OTHER
THINGS ARE NOT ONE OF THEM.
I KNOW THE RIGHT THING
TO DO IS TO KNUCKLE DOWN.
STOP HAVING THE
PASTAS AND THE CHIPS
AND STICK TO THE PORRIDGE.
I GUESS WHAT I WANT TO BELIEVE
IS THAT I WILL LOSE THE WEIGHT
AND WE'LL GET SORTED.
THREE MONTHS AGO
THERE WAS NO QUESTION.
THAT'S RIGHT, YEA
THAT'S VERY COMMON.
TIM'S BEING FORCED TO
MAKE A DIFFICULT CHOICE.
REALLY GO FOR THE TRANSPLANT
THAT MIGHT COMPROMISE
HIS OWN HEALTH, OR FOCUS
ON HIS OWN FAMILY
AND HELP CAROLINE THROUGH
HER DIFFICULT PREGNANCY.
HOW WOULD OTHER FAMILIES
DEAL WITH SUCH A DIFFICULT
MORAL DILEMMA?
WELCOME TO MORAL MASTERMIND.
DON'T GET CLOSE TO
THE MICROPHONE
BECAUSE IT WON'T
WORK TYRESE.
DON'T DO THAT.
YOUR NAME PLEASE.
TONI PLASTER.
AND YOU'RE THE
PARENT OF?
CHARLIE PLASTER.
RIGHT.
YOU'VE FINALLY MANAGED
TO SELL YOUR HOUSE
AND YOU'RE ABOUT TO
EXCHANGE HOUSES
AND YOU SUDDENLY NOTICED
THE ROOF IS LEAKING.
DO YOU JUST KICK CLEAR OUT
OR DO YOU OWN UP
AND DO SOMETHING ABOUT
IT BEFORE YOU GO?
CLEAR OUT AND
NOT SAY A WORD.
OKAY.
GET IT FIXED.
WHY?
I THINK THE REPERCUSSIONS
THAT WOULD COME AFTER,
WOULD BE NOT WORTH
THE HASSLE.
I'D OWN UP BECAUSE THINGS
ALWAYS HAVE A WAY
OF CATCHING YOU
BACK UP.
OKAY.
YOU'VE DONE SOME WORK AT HOME
AND YOU BRING IT IN TO SHOW
YOUR TEACHER AND YOUR TEACHER
SAYS THIS IS REALLY GOOD WORK
BUT YOU KNOW THAT YOUR
MOM REALLY DID MOST OF IT.
WOULD YOU TELL YOUR TEACHER
IT WAS REALLY YOUR MOMS WORK
OR WOULD YOU SAY
IT WAS YOURS?
IT WAS MINE.
YOU'D TELL THE
TEACHER IT WAS YOURS.
TEACHER IT WAS YOUR MOM?
I DON'T KNOW.
YOU DON'T KNOW.
YOU JUST THINKS IT'S
BEST TO BE HONEST?
YEA.
YOUR CRUISE SHIP HAS JUST HIT
A ROCK AND THERE IS JUST ABOUT
ENOUGH RAFTS TO GO AROUND
BUT YOUR RAFT IS OVERLOADED.
YOU'VE GOT A VERY BADLY
INJURED PERSON ON THE RAFT
AND IT'S SINKING.
THEY'RE GONNA DIE ANYWAY DO
YOU THROW THEM OVERBOARD
TO SAVE THE OTHERS?
LAUGHTER.
NO, I DON'T THINK I COULD
LIVE WITH MYSELF AFTERWARDS.
I COULDN'T DO THAT.
AND YOU'RE HALF
DEAD ANYWAY SO...
SO YOU'D BE QUITE
BRUTALLY FRANK AND PRAGMATIC.
YES.
I'D GIVE HIM A
CHANCE.
THROW THEM OVERBOARD?
UM..NOT ALIVE.
YOU'D KILL THEM FIRST?
YES.
BUT THEN NATHAN'S DAD IS
PROBABLY THE ONLY ONE OF OUR
PARENTS WHO'S SKILLFUL ENOUGH
TO KILL WITH HIS BARE HANDS.
EVERY MONDAY NIGHT THE PRICE
FAMILY GO FOR KARATE LESSONS.
RICHARD IS THE INSTRUCTOR.
HE'S GOT A BLACK BELT.
WE FACE EACH OTHER.
WE SHOW THAT RESPECT FOR EACH
OTHER AND THEN WE GRAB EACH
OTHER AND WE TRY TO GET
EACH OTHER DOWN ON THEIR BACK.
IT MAY SEEM A CONTRADICTION
TO THE BUDDHIST TEACHING
OF DO NO HARM.
BUT RICHARD THINKS THAT
KARATE AND MEDITATION
ARE TWO FACES OF
THE SAME COIN.
I WOULD SAY STRUCTURE
MORE THAN DISCIPLINE BECAUSE
DISCIPLINE OFTEN SEEMS THAT
YOU'RE TRYING TO CONTROL.
WE ARE NOT TRYING TO CONTROL.
WE ARE TRYING TO SORT
OF STRUCTURE AND GUIDE
RATHER THEN CONTROL.
THE PRICES THINK THAT KARATE
WILL GIVE NATHAN A WAY
TO EXPEND HIS ENERGY,
CONTROL HIS ANGER
AND MANAGE HIS
NATURAL AGGRESSION.
AND HE LOVES IT.
GOOD WELL DONE.
&nbspYOU HURT
&nbspTHAT BOY.
[LAUGHS]
WE ARE NOT ALLOW
TO FIGHT AT SCHOOL.
&nbspWHY?
BECAUSE THE
TEACHER SAYS.
BECAUSE IT'S BAD.
BUT HERE IT'S GOOD.
IF I GOT NATHAN DOWN, AND HE
CAN'T TAP BECAUSE I GOT HIS
LEGS AND ARMS TIED UP,
THE PRICES HOPE NATHAN WILL
CONTROL HIS OWN BEHAVIOR
AND MAKE HIS OWN CHOICES.
I WOULD CHOP
THE HEAD OFF.
DON'T YOU THINK
THAT'S A BIT SEVERE?
I'LL CHOP YOUR
HEAD OFF.
LETS NOT DO NO HARM.
NO NO NOT MORE.
I THINK HE'S LEARNING TO
BE ABLE TO THINK ABOUT
HOW DO I WANT TO
DEAL WITH THIS?
AND THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
HOPEFULLY HE'LL CARRY ON DOING
AND NOT JUST RESPOND AND GO
WITH THE HERD SO TO SPEAK.
THAT YOU CAN STAND ALONE.
AND NATHAN HAS LEARNED TO
STAND BY HIS PRINCIPLES.
&nbspWHY ARE YOU A
&nbspVEGETARIAN NATHAN?
BECAUSE WE DON'T
LIKE KILLING.
&nbspHAVE YOU EVER
&nbspHAD FISH OR MEAT?
I'VE HAD MEAT
BEFORE.
YOU TRIED IT ONCE.
WHEN I WAS ONLY 4.
IT WASN'T MEAT
IT WAS TUNA FISH.
WAS IT TUNA?
YES.
SO THAT'S FISH.
&nbsp WHAT DO THE OTHER CHILDREN
&nbsp THINK WHEN YOU SAY YOU DON'T
EAT MEAT AND FISH?
THEY SAY TRY IT.
&nbsp WHAT DO THINK OF YOUR
&nbsp FRIENDS WHEN THEY EAT MEAT?
THEY'RE WRONG.
I DON'T THINK
EVERYONE'S GOT A
CHOICE TO MAKE.
AND THEY'RE JUST
DIFFERENT.
HIS PARENTS ARE KEEN HE
ALSO LEARNS TOLERANCE
AND ADAPTABILITY BECAUSE
THINGS ARE CHANGING.
FOR ALL OF NATHAN'S LIFE
RICHARD HAS WORKED AT HOME AS
AN ARTIST AND SCULPTOR.
BUT NOW HE'S GOT A JOB.
IN A CALL CENTER.
YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT'S
AROUND THE CORNER DO YOU?
I THINK I KINDA STUMBLED INTO
THIS TO A CERTAIN EXTENT
AND IT'S GOOD FUN.
&nbsp IS THE CORRECT AMOUNT
&nbsp BEING PAID FOR YOU?
IT'S DEFINITELY
CHANGED ME YA.
THERE'S A BIT OF A
JUMP IN MY STEP AGAIN.
I THINK I WAS
GETTING A BIT JADED
WITH BEING IN THE
STUDIO ALL THE TIME.
OR BEING OUT WORKING ON A PIECE
OF SCULPTURE ALL THE TIME.
IT WAS JUST GETTING A
BIT LONELY I SUPPOSE
AND I THINK IT'S TAKEN
THAT PART AWAY.
RUTH ALSO FEELS THERE
IS SOMETHING IN THE AIR.
THINGS ARE CHANGING FOR US.
A LOT OF IT IS TO DO
WITH RICHARD'S WORK
BUT I ALSO THINK THE
KIDS ARE GROWING UP.
THEY'RE CHANGING,
I'M CHANGING.
I'M NOT RUNNING AWAY
FROM MYSELF AS MUCH.
THEY'VE COME TO A DECISION WHICH
WILL AFFECT ALL THE FAMILY.
THEY'RE GOING TO SELL THE
HOUSE, WHICH EMBODIES
ALL THE VALUES THAT
SETS THEM APART,
AND MOVE BACK
NEARER THE CITY.
JOY IS SAD BUT NATHAN ISN'T.
I DON'T WANT TO
MOVE HOUSE.
I DO.
WHAT YOU LOOKING
FORWARD TO?
GETTING ANOTHER HOUSE AND
MAYBE A LOVELY GARDEN.
AND A BIGGER ONE
THAN THIS.
I ALWAYS USED TO LAUGH AND
SAY I NEVER REALLY WANTED
TO LIVE IN SUBURBIAN
MARSHMELLOWDOM.
THERE ARE THINGS TO DO WITH
SUBURBIAN MARSHMELLOWDOM
THAT MAYBE ARE DIFFERENT NOW
BECAUSE WE HAVE THE KIDS.
IT WOULD BE NICE IF THEY COULD
RIDE THEIR BIKES SOMEWHERE SAFE,
AND ALSO PLAY WITH KIDS
IN THE AREA AFTER SCHOOL
AND HAVE SOME
FRIENDS LOCALLY.
WHAT ABOUT ALL
OF YOUR FRIENDS?
AH YES I'LL MISS
MY FRIENDS.
BUT IF IT'S FAR FAR FOR ME
I CAN'T MEET THEM ANYMORE.
MY FRIENDS LIVES
ON THE FARM.
WE DON'T GET TO
SEE THEM ANYMORE.
&nbsp SO ARE YOU GONNA MISS YOUR
&nbsp FRIENDS AT SCHOOL NATHAN?
NOPE.
NATHAN, JOY AND THEIR
PARENTS WILL HAVE TO SEE
HOW THEIR PRINCIPLES SURVIVE
AT TIME OF CHANGE.
IN BIRMINGHAM, THERE'S
NO STOPPING MARIE.
CHANGE IS THE
PRINCIPLE SHE LIVES BY.
I DECIDED TO GO INTO
PARTNERSHIP AND OPEN
AN EXCLUSIVE, DESIGNER,
ESTABLISHMENT.
HER PARTNER IS
HER MOM BEVERLY.
AND ALL THE FAMILY
ARE LENDING A HAND.
BLUE IS TOO COLD.
IT HAS TO BE
WARM AND INVITING.
RED IS TOO DARK.
I'M HOPING THAT TYRESE WILL
GET THE VALUES OF HARD WORK.
YOU CAN DO ANYTHING
YOU WANT TO DO
IF YOU PUT YOUR
MIND TO IT.
AND THAT YOU CAN ACHIEVE
WHATEVER YOU WANT TO DO.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS TANISHA
SAID TO ME WHEN SHE WAS LITTLE
WAS THAT SHE
WANTED TO BE A DUSTMAN.
I SAID GREAT GO BE A
DUSTMAN BUT OWN THE COMPANY.
NOT IF TYRESE HAS
ANYTHING TO DO WITH IT.
AHHHH.
&nbspWHAT WOULD YOU
&nbspLIKE?
A BROTHER.
GOAL!!
EVEN THOUGHT THEY BICKER AND
ARGUE ALL THE TIME HE DOES
THINK ABOUT HER AND HE'LL
THINK ABOUT OTHER PEOPLE.
HE'S GETTING A LOT BETTER WITH
HIS COMMUNICATION SKILLS BUT
HE DOESN'T EXPRESS HIMSELF AS
WELL AS PROBABLY HE COULD DO
AND I JUST PUT IT DOWN TO
THE FACT HE'S FIVE YOU KNOW.
SO IT WILL BE QUITE
INTERESTING TO SEE WHERE
HE'S LIKE AT EIGHT.
HE'S GONE THROUGH ISSUES THAT
HE HAD AND HE'S COME THROUGH
HE'S DOING WELL NOW AND HE'S
FINE AND NOT ANGRY ANYMORE.
HE'S A LOT SOFTER.
MARIE HOPES HER SENSE OF
PURPOSE AND SELF BELIEF
WILL CONTINUE TO RUB
OFF ON TYRESE.
A SENSE OF PURPOSE AND SELF
BELIEF SEEMS DIFFICULT
AT THE MOMENT IN THE
PLASTER HOUSEHOLD.
CHARLIE.
LOOK OUT FOR SCHOOL NOW.
ROB'S BEEN OUT OF WORK
FOR SEVERAL MONTHS
AND HAS TAKEN OVER MUCH
OF THE CHILDCARE.
FOR THE FIRST COUPLE OF
WEEKS IT WASN'T TOO BAD
BECAUSE IT WAS LIKE HAVING
TWO WEEKS OFF REALLY.
BUT OBVIOUSLY LOOKING AFTER
THE KIDS IS AN EYE OPENER
TO SEE WHAT YOU HAVE
TO DO AT HOME,
WHEN YOU HAVE
THREE KIDS.
I MUCH RATHER BE AT
WORK THAN AT HOME.
IT'S NOT WHAT THEY WANTED.
THE RIGHT THING FOR ME AND
MY FAMILY IS THAT WE WORK AND
THEY GROW UP AND SEE THAT.
THEY'VE GOT SOME SORT OF
AN INSPIRATION I HOPE
FROM ME AND ROB.
SO WITH ROB UNABLE TO FIND
WORK AND MONEY TIGHT,
TONI HAS STEPPED IN
AS THE BREAD WINNER.
HELLO.
TWICE A DAY TONI AND HER
COLLEAGUE SARA COME IN TO HELP
ALLAN, ONE OF THEIR
25 CLIENTS.
HE'S BEEN CRIPPLED WITH
POLIO VIRTUALLY ALL HIS LIFE.
I LOVE IT.
FULFILLING AIN'T IT SARA?
IT'S JUST DIFFERENT.
YOU'RE NOT STUCK IN
AN OFFICE ON A PHONE
OR YOU KNOW IT'S JUST
DIFFERENT EVERYDAY
AND ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU GET USED
TO THE SAME PEOPLE IT'S...
I LOVE COMING
HERE IN THE MORNING.
FOR ME TEA AND BISCUITS.
TONI.
MIND YOU IT MAKES MY
LIFE HARD, WINDING ME UP,
CALLING ME HELEN.
JUST MAKES ME FEEL GOOD.
I DON'T GET UP IN THE
MORNING AND GO YOU KNOW...
I LOOK FORWARD TO
COMING TO WORK.
I'D SAY I WAS A
BETTER PERSON NOW.
AS I GOT OLDER...
WHEN I WAS YOUNGER I DIDN'T
CARE ABOUT ANYTHING REALLY.
I'VE CHANGED FOR THE BETTER.
I LIKE WHAT I DO.
I LIKE THE PERSON I AM.
I LIKE THE FACT THAT I COULD
GO INTO SOMEBODY'S HOUSE
AND JUST BY ASKING HOW THEY ARE,
CAN BRIGHTEN UP THEIR DAY.
I THINK IT MUST BE LIKE SPLIT
PERSONALITY BECAUSE IN SCHOOL
I USED TO BE HORRIBLE.
REALLY HORRIBLE.
SO I WENT FROM BIG TUFF GIRL
BIT AND THEN I STILL HAD THIS
SOFTER SIDE THAT I WANTED TO
SHOW AS WELL SO I DON'T KNOW
MAYBE THAT WAS MY WAY OF
SAYING I AIN'T ALL THAT BAD.
IT'S THE LAST DAY OF
CHARLIE'S SCHOOL YEAR.
SO WHICH SIDE OF HER
MOM HAS CHARLIE GOT?
SHE'S KIND, SHE IS HELPFUL.
SHE'S VERY CARING.
SHE SHOWS A LOVELY CARING
NATURE TOWARDS OTHER CHILDREN
AND I THINK THAT'S A
LOVELY QUALITY TO HAVE.
SHE'S GOT VERY ENDEARING
QUALITIES AND SHE CAN PLAY
BY THE RULES.
SHE KNOWS WHAT SHE IS ALLOWED
TO DO AND WHAT SHE IS NOT.
AND IT SHOWS IN
HER SCHOOL REPORT.
IT'S LOOKING
REALLY GOOD ACTUALLY.
CHARLIE IS A VERY WELL
MANNERED GIRL UNLIKE ME.
SHE SHOWS EXCELLENT
LEARNING POTENTIAL.
SHE'S MADE EXCELLENT PROGRESS.
VERY GOOD!
BUT BY THE END OF THE SUMMER,
ROB'S BEEN UNEMPLOYED
FOR NINE MONTHS.
AT HOME THE
PRESSURE IS MOUNTING.
ROB AND TONI ARE STARTING TO
SEE ANOTHER SIDE TO CHARLIE.
THE ONE THAT WILL
SPEAK OUT
IF SHE DOESN'T LIKE
WHAT IS GOING ON.
WE WAS ARGUING AND
SHE'S SHOUTING,
WILL YOU JUST STOP
SHOUTING AT EACH OTHER!
AND WE SAT DOWN ONE
NIGHT AND I SAID TO HIM
THEY'RE PICKING UP ON IT.
THAT'S NOT GOOD.
BUT IT'S ONE THING TO
STAND UP TO YOUR PARENTS
AND QUITE ANOTHER TO STAND
UP FOR WHAT YOU BELIEVE
TO STRANGERS.
SO AT SIX, HOW GOOD ARE OUR
CHILDREN AT STANDING UP
AND BEING COUNTED?
WHAT WE DID WAS TO GIVE
OUR CHILDREN A PHOTOGRAPH
OF A SWEET ELDERLY COUPLE,
WHO OUR EXPERIMENTER SAYS
IS ACTUALLY HER MOM AND DAD
AND VERY SPECIAL TO HER.
THEN SHE ASKED THE
CHILDREN TO TEAR IT UP.
&nbsp I WANT YOU TO TEAR IT UP.
BUT WOULD THEY OBEY?
TYRESE TORE UP THE PHOTO
BUT THEN HE TRIED TO
PUT IT BACK TOGETHER
STRAIGHT AFTERWARDS.
EVE QUESTIONED
THE INSTRUCTION.
WHY?
&nbsp I JUST WANT YOU TO
&nbsp TEAR IT UP.
&nbsp OKAY, THANK YOU.
BUT THEN OBEYED.
SHE WILL STILL BOW
TO AUTHORITY
EVEN IF IT GOES AGAINST
HER INSTINCTS.
NATHAN COULDN'T
BRING HIMSELF TO DO IT.
&nbsp I'D LIKE YOU TO
&nbsp RIP IT UP.
&nbsp DO YOU NOT WANT
&nbsp TO RIP IT UP?
BUT CHARLIE WAS THE ONLY
CHILD WHO ACTIVELY REFUSED
TO FOLLOW THE ORDER.
&nbsp WHY DON'T YOU
&nbsp WANT TO RIP IT UP?
BECAUSE I DON'T WANT TO.
CHARLIE DISPLAYS THE
MOST IMPRESSIVE SENSE
OF MORAL INTEGRITY.
BUT SHE ISN'T ALONE.
MOST OF OUR CHILDREN ARE
MUCH MORE MORAL THEN ADULTS
WHO DID SIMILAR OBEDIENCE
TESTS WORLD WIDE.
THEIR FAMILIES ALL HAVE VERY
DIFFERENT VALUES AND BELIEFS
BUT ONE THING THEIR PARENTS
ALL WANT IS THEIR CHILDREN
TO HAVE RESPECT
FOR OTHER PEOPLE.
AND IT SEEMS THAT
THEY HAVE.
SOME PEOPLE SAY
THAT OUR SOCIETY
IS ON THE DOWNWARD SLIDE.
WELL OUR CHILDREN
CERTAINLY AREN'T.
THE SCABOROUGHS
HAVE MADE A DECISION.
THEY'VE POSTPONED THE
KIDNEY TRANSPLANT
UNTIL AFTER THEIR NEW
BABY HAS BEEN BORN.
WITH THE FAMILY'S
DILEMMA LIFTED,
EVE CAN LOOK AHEAD.
I JUST SAW WHAT THE
BABY ACTUALLY LOOKED LIKE.
IT JUST LOOKED SORT OF LIKE
THE SAME LIKE A REAL BABY
EXCEPT SO SMALL.
JUST ABOUT THAT
LONG AND THAT FAT.
&nbsp LIKE A LITTLE TADPOLE?
YA JUST LIKE A
LITTLE TADPOLE.
IT WAS ACTUALLY LIKE
A LITTLE TADPOLE
BUT WAS ABOUT THAT
LONG AND THAT FAT.